---
layout: post
title: Dev tips no. 2 - type faster!
subtitle: Mastering a keyboard is fundamental.
bigimg: /img/posts/the-average-tech-guy-0D4vVgznTKE-unsplash.jpg
tags: [productivity]
comments: true
---

The second productivity tip for a programmer is so obvious that I almost never hear about that. I guess we have all read tons of posts about mastering our toolset, languages, time management and so on.
Maybe you have a different experience, but I never hear about the need to master the typing. I am not talking here about remembering shortcuts or doing things without a mouse but just typing. This is trivial,
so obvious but makes an incredible difference. Let me share my story.

### Before I learned how to type correctly
For more than twenty years of using a keyboard, I have never learned to type correctly. I remember that as a kid, I have tried for few minutes a bunch of programs that were showing how to type correctly. They were so
boring and - at least those days - I have not seen any benefit from typing faster. Over years, I become better and better in typing. Still, without learning how to do it correctly. By "better" I meant I could type faster
and maybe with slightly less errors than before. I thought it was good enough, even for a programming job.

### First decade of work
With this working but still incorrect skill, I spent my first ten years doing software engineering. But one day, I just decided that it is a high time to at least try once again to learn typing. I did not know exactly for what,
but I was curious whether I could benefit from that. I was able to type moderately fast, still I love searching for possible improvements. I set a pretty relaxed deadline for about a year rewire my brain and develop
a new typing habits. I started doing first lessons, repeating keys for particular fingers...

### First week of learning
First lessons were pretty painful. I started hard and my hands very pretty exhausted after typing keys in that "weird day". Nevertheless, the more lessons I completed, the more sense I have seen in this. I think this was the breaking point -
I remember I said aloud that this "correct way of typing" has some logic behind it.