---
layout: post
title: Yet another Spring WebFlux introduction
subtitle: Simplify 2FA by U2F key ...and not only!
bigimg: /img/posts/scott-webb-yekGLpc3vro-unsplash.jpg
img-author: Scott Webb
tags: [reactive, java, spring]
comments: true
published: false
---

Learning a reactive programming is not that easy, therefore there are lots of blog posts, books and videos about this topic. 
If you are trying to get more familiar with the Spring WebFlux, I guess this is not the post about page you are reading. This was at least in my case, where I had to collect a knowledge
from several different posts to get up to speed with the Spring WebFlux. In this post, I will try to combine few things about the Spring WebFlux I learned so far.
This is yet another post on this topic, still maybe you will find it useful.

# The Reactive Manifesto
- responsive
- elastic
- resilient
- message driven

# What is a Spring WebFlux?
The Spring WebFlux has been added Spring 5.0. So generally speaking, if you use a Spring Boot 2, you can just add a dependency to your build file and you can start
having fun with the reactive programming. 

- Non-blocking, reactive framework that supports reactive streams back pressure.
- It is built around the Observer pattern, known also as Publisher-Subscriber. "Reactive" means the programming model that are built around asynchronously reacting to external changes (like messages).
In other words, there is a publisher we can subscribe to and react on the published messages. A subscriber can process and publish those messages further.
I guess most of us coded at least one ActionListener that could react on the UI events. Using the WebFlux is somehow similar.
- It runs on Servlet 3.1+ containers, like Tomcat, Jetty (or even WebSphere 9) as well as on non-Servlet runtimes such as Netty and Undertow.
- It can coexist with the Spring MVC in the same project, therefore it is possible to migrate a current, non-reactive project gradually.
- It is based on the Project Reactor (RxJava is another reactive framework)
- Declarative style of usage, similar to Java8 Streams. Thanks to lambdas, Spring WebFlux also can offer functional web endpoints (alongside with annotated controllers)
- Spring MVC: one-request-per-thread model. Spring WebFlux: few main threads and multiple processing threads
- Non-blocking back pressure - in synchronous model, blocking calls are a natural form of back pressure forcing the caller to wait. In the reactive model, the caller does not need to wait, therefore we need
to handle the back pressure differently

# Why it was created?
- IoT, mobile devices, apps that have millions of clients need to handle requests effectively
- Many sites also need to to scale with less hardware resources (like e-commerce shops during a Black Friday)
 
 e-commerce shops (Black Friday)

TODO:
# Difference between SpringMVC and Webflux
# Annotations vs functional style
- Annotated Controllers
- Functional Endpoints

# Types of servers
# Reactive manifesto
# Mono vs Flux
# Comparison with the 
# Hot vs Cold publishers
# Backpressure

```java
    private final Flux<Integer> hotPublisherShare = Flux.fromIterable(generateCollectionOfIntegers(1000)).delayElements(Duration.ofSeconds(1)).share();

```

```java
    private final Flux<Integer> hotPublisherCache = Flux.fromIterable(generateCollectionOfIntegers(1000)).delayElements(Duration.ofSeconds(1)).cache();
```

# subscribeOn, how to handle blocking services
# WebClient
# tools to debug (checkpoints, hound)
# migration from the Spring MVC

# Links:
https://www.slideshare.net/mobile/Pivotal/reactive-card-magic-understanding-spring-webflux-and-project-reactor
https://rxmarbles.com