---
layout: post
title: Dev tips no. 3 - Know who you are
subtitle: Align your work with your personality
bigimg: /img/posts/lee-soo-hyun--YJ1i4PlO6E-unsplash.jpg
tags: [productivity]
comments: true
---

We all know there are lots of people unhappy with their work. It is not that easy to find something that meets all Ikigai criteria. I heavy believe that doing something
meaningful, fulfilling yet financially rewarding is achievable for lots of people, maybe even most of them. One of the best thing when starting searching for a "dream" job or occupation
is to understand who we really are and what our souls want to achieve. It is so common we fall under well-established way of thinking about what a good job or a career path are or what
can give us a happiness. Diving deeper into our mind can shed more light on the career path and our whole life as well. Even if we already have found something we love doing, this knowledge
can increase our productivity and release us from lots of psychical tensions or many stressors. 

There are a few things that I regret I did not know earlier. Understanding them would be definitely helpful at my first jobs where lots of things were new, therefore stressful.
Even now, it was a joy to have a feeling that I am not alone, species like me exist and other people also have to face difficulties with their personality (like being stressed by stupid things or too sensitive, etc.). Those things are:
- my personality type
- whether I am/or not among a HSP - Highly Sensitive People
- few syndromes so common in IT world

## Personality type
Let's start with the personality type. Despite every human is different, it seems to be possible to understand more or less a personality by a few common characteristis. There are various types of tests available,
I think it is good to take at least several of them to have a better match. I especially enjoyed Myers-Briggs (MBTI) tests, there are plenty websites that offer the test for free and if you want to know more - then you pay.
One important thing to mention - we cannot treat the test as an oracle. It is only approximation how possibly we perceive the inner and outer world. For example, my personality is ENFP, where
I make decisions by my heart and focus much on relations between people. I have read that such a machine-focused job, like a programming, is highly discouraged. That couldn't be further from the truth and I believe it is because
of the wrong perception by the test makes of what the programming really is.

If you have not done such a test before, go ahead and do it as soon as possible - maybe you will understand yourself better. From the programming job perspective,
I understood few things after diving deeper into my personality. Things like that are especially important:
- low vs high a need for novelty - whether it is better switch projects and technologies often or to stick with the same project for a longer time, that means a "warm, comfortable seat".
- low vs high need for a freedom - whether it is better to work with a well-established environments with a rigid procedures and lower decisiveness or work with a challenging and somehow risky projects with lots of
responsibilites.
- following plans and schedules vs energy spikes  - very important to understand to boost the productivity up - stick to the plan or ride the spikes
- acting based on emotions/facts - important how you make your decisions, also at work
- interpersonal skills - vital to understand if you plan a further career i.e. in a leadership

There are far more benefits from understanding ourselves. For me, also the feeling of "being understood" was extremely relieving.

## Being among a Highly Sensitive People
Recently I have also discovered I am a highly sensitive person. I even did not know a term like that exists but it is estimated that 20% of the society belongs to HSP. What are the main features of a HSP?
Here you go, at least few of them. Basically, HSP:
- do not like a noise and crowded places (open-spaces are evil!:))
- hate being criticized (comments code-reviews shall be kind:))
- hate competing with others, they prefer cooperation or working solo
- do not like conflicts and aggression (I even dislike cynic jokes, etc.)
- need a longer time for a decision (i.e. choosing a main framework shall take some time, etc.)
- compare with others and are too fragile about what others think of them

Thanks to finding out I am a HSP, I can be more immune to lots of stressors I did not understood earlier. I already heavily detached from treating my code as my child :) - code reviews are much more pleasureful.
If someone criticize me, I always remind myself to not treat that personally. It is not easy, though. I also would quit a job if I had to compete with others. Thanks to understanding of my personality, I am less
prone to force myself to do something. Instead, I try different approaches - more suitable to myself.


TODO:
- impostor syndrome
- hero syndrome
- real programmer syndrdome
- too important syndrome